Jerry Michalski: Greetings. This is the open global mind community call for Thursday, July 31, st 2025. Last day of July.
Jerry Michalski: Tomorrow starts. August happened awful fast.
Jerry Michalski: And next week's call will be a check in call. Next week's call. I will be away, so I'm I think I'm looking for I can open the room. But I'm I'm gonna be on vacation. So I'm gonna look for a volunteer who'd like to host
Jerry Michalski: next Thursday's Ogm call.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Where are you going.
Jerry Michalski: Italy, going to the town of Bergamo, Italy.
Jerry Michalski: which is a walled city, an ancient city, and was the westernmost outpost of the Venetian Doge back in the day. So if you go to Milan and then drive 45 min northeast, you're in Bergamo. But Milan was the enemy, because the Milanese were the next Empire over.
Jerry Michalski: And so, Bergam, there's an old city that's up high. That's a little bit of an angle like this. It's like a lozenge plateau at a little angle, and then there's a new city down below, which is really very nice, and they made it a heritage site some years ago, and as a result there is not a stone place like the masonry is incredible, and what I've learned is that in Florence and Venice, when they started building all the fancy buildings. They would get their masons from Bergam because the masons were so famous.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Oh!
Jerry Michalski: So a lot of a lot of Florentine and Venetian architecture, and all that owes some some little debt to Berga Musk
Jerry Michalski: people who knows, so I'll be there for 10 days, and then I'll come back and
Jerry Michalski: cool we are.
Jerry Michalski: I thought. Last week's call on grief was a really lovely call. We tended to focus a lot on personal experiences of grief and handling things there. And I think when I was setting up that call the 1st time I thought there was a lot to talk about about societal grief, about about large scale grief.
Jerry Michalski: and how we process it well or poorly.
Jerry Michalski: And so I'm hoping to take us into that conversation today and see where that takes us. There's and we we also crossed into trauma a bit in the last call. And I think there's there's sort of a couple of concepts of intergenerational trauma societal trauma things like that. These are. These are, I think related. Subjects. Of course.
Jerry Michalski: And Klaus, if if you don't mind, I think one of the I think one of the maybe obvious places to start. Here is German war, guilt and grief.
Jerry Michalski: and the processing, the generational processing of those kinds of things.
Jerry Michalski: and whether or not that worked well, because what we see now is the rise of the far right in Germany, and a whole bunch of strange things happening that
Jerry Michalski: that
Jerry Michalski: I think the processing post-war was meant to avoid, or in some way, you know. Let's see if we can just skip creating another World war or participating in another World War. The formation of the EU was an attempt to diffuse the tensions between the countries in Europe and so forth. But
Jerry Michalski: do you mind just telling us what your your own experience of that has been.
Klaus Mager: Well, Germany went through an incredible
Klaus Mager: time. I was born in 1949, you know, and and then I was
Klaus Mager: maybe 3, 4, 5 years old. My parents had a restaurant, so they both worked in the evening.
Klaus Mager: and we had a TV that was had, I think, one or 2 channels, and the Allies forced the
Klaus Mager: Germans to to broadcast these images from the concentration camps, and from
Klaus Mager: so I remember as a little boy, I still still in my head? You know how you saw people untressing, queuing up in front of a ditch, getting shot in the head, you know, falling into a pile
Klaus Mager: people being hung up on butcher hooks, I mean, just unbelievable stuff, you know.
Klaus Mager: So so I mean, that's and that was meant to
Klaus Mager: make it clear to. This is what you guys did. Right?
Klaus Mager: so so for my generation, it was like, really, you guys did this sort of thing, you know, and and you found this normal. And
Klaus Mager: the surprising thing was the defensiveness of my parents, generation
Klaus Mager: to to reject, wanting to to see this as guilt, you know.
Klaus Mager: and so that the it was, it was actually really necessary for Germany to put in these laws that made it a crime to do a Hitler salute, or to repeat Nazi propaganda, and in hindsight that was really necessary to suppress that sentiment, you know, into.
Klaus Mager: to to force that kind of of shame on to onto the people in general. Right?
Klaus Mager: So it's a generational trauma that that will be, you know, forever stained and what you see today is
Klaus Mager: a a generation that grew up, you know, after mine and and beyond, you know. So the millennials and and younger.
Klaus Mager: who who didn't fully get what this was. You know they they didn't see these images. They didn't feel the awareness of
Klaus Mager: it's so helpful we can talk about, of of all this. I mean, it's just
Klaus Mager: the when- when you when you
Klaus Mager: see the the these images right? And then you talk with people like my dad's restaurant. They had this round table. It's called the Stumptish, you know where the regulars come and drink beer before they go home, or you know, in the evening.
Klaus Mager: and the the
Klaus Mager: the conversations that that the way the way they rationalized this whole thing, you know, was just was just really incredible.
Klaus Mager: Well, and so so when I listen to, I was listening to Yuval Harari the other day. And he is saying, you know what's happening in Israel right now is is creating generational trauma.
Klaus Mager: This will, this will last is going. This will go into the history books and and
Klaus Mager: and and create a lot of pain. Now that is being is being really expressed now.
Klaus Mager: So yeah, it. It's it's
Klaus Mager: there is a collective mind, you know there is such a thing as a collective mind, and it's tribal, I would say, and and you you feel either pride or I mean on from the extremes, you know from you feel pride and belonging, or you feel shame, you know.
Klaus Mager: and it's no it's all in the same book.
Jerry Michalski: Klaus. Thank you.
Jerry Michalski: So many thoughts, so many different thoughts.
Jerry Michalski: There's some piece of
Jerry Michalski: showing the footage of the atrocities that is to anchor in the fact that this really happened, because what we're seeing is that many people will say, Oh, yeah. January 6th was not a that was a picnic that was a like a tourist in the capital, no big deal, and rewriting history in some sense. So so, having some sort of documentary evidence and making people see it feels like that, but it also has backlash. It also causes a whole bunch of other forces. And I'm
Jerry Michalski: I think that the dynamic is really interesting. One of the interesting thoughts in my notes in my brain is, How do you end wars? Well.
Jerry Michalski: how do we process things? Well, because part of what I'm wondering is whether the different measures that were taken, including making it illegal to buy or sell Nazi paraphernalia do the sigheil, or whatever else those were. Those were made illegal, as you said. Did that
Jerry Michalski: suppress conversation and processing and grief?
Jerry Michalski: Or did that help by taking that off the table entirely, and I don't know what the answers are, but I think that those are calls that people made at a societal level, that we're still reckoning with in some sense right.
Klaus Mager: People were totally shell shocked about this, you know, and and and in, I think, in in, like my parents, know my mother, you know, in their mind is
Klaus Mager: I wasn't the decision maker now, what was I supposed to do about it? And and so on. So this to experience. This kind of collective guilt is really a trip, I mean for me. Now I was studying in Paris, and
Klaus Mager: there were people who hated Germans absolutely hated them because they got traumatized during World War 2, you know, and I'm going well, hey? What do I have to do with it? Well, you're German, and so the the there is this
Klaus Mager: mid in Germany, you know. You're with it, you know. And so
Klaus Mager: the the yeah, I mean, my generation has this trauma.
Klaus Mager: you know, firsthand this this like. My God! I can't believe we did this, you know. And you guys did this, and you got captured in it, and your mind is still trapped in it, and you can't get out of it.
Klaus Mager: you know, and it's
Klaus Mager: and the harder you push them, you know, the more defensive they get. And and because the pain is so is so raw. And so, you know, so so emotional.
Klaus Mager: it's a. It's a really tough. It's a really amazing thing. And the tragic. The tragedy is that
Klaus Mager: you're seeing it happening all over the world right now. Yeah.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: You're dramatizing. Oss! Now.
Jerry Michalski: Thank you. Thank you. That's that's exactly what I'm thinking. Kill. Please.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Yeah, and hurt people hurt other people.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: There's a generational transmission of the pain my father fought in World War 2,
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: and to his, I think to his last day would not buy anything German.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: So an example of that being carried. The
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: I think of the truth and reconciliation commissions in South Africa, and the work being done in Canada, and the, you know, multi-century generational trauma in the Balkans that you saw flare in the 19 nineties in the world, in the wars there.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Jerry. What you said about rewriting history is really, you know.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: very present, because we're seeing a concerted effort to do that in this country right now.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: you know, as a matter of policy and thuggery and bribery in a you know, in a very systematic and organized way, with, you know, with surprisingly little pushback and effective defense against it. So there's that
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: it, you know, Klaus, you talked about the general generational grief being
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: what cultivated, I guess, in the Middle East right now. The trauma for the Gazans is obvious. The trauma for the Israelis is more complex. But what we're seeing rising suicide rates in Israel we're seeing more Israeli military people refusing to serve
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: at a projection of what's going on. But the the huge thing in the background is that apparently I don't know if this is completely true. I hear this from folks is that Israeli news media is not fully covering the war. In other words, Israeli citizens are not seeing. It's like the Germans in a way like the Germans in World War 2. The Israeli citizens are not seeing the extent
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: of what's going on in Gaza, the implication being that if they did, there'd be more outrage than there's been. There's been considerable amount, but with very little political leverage in the political system they have there. So
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: you know, at some point, when that comes out they'll be held to pay for that
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: other notable thing. I didn't see this in the time. I haven't seen the Times this morning, or the American papers this morning, but yesterday there was an announcement out of the UN. That the
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: in addition to Britain and France, and now Canada, speaking about recognizing a Palestinian State yesterday, 17 countries, and the Arab League and the European Union, called on Hamas to disarm
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: and to stand down from any political leadership in Palestinian territories was kind of stunning that the entire Arab League signed on to that. So you know the game is shifting. How you unravel the grief is a real mystery.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: but pretty clearly not by denying it.
Jerry Michalski: Yeah, there's I.
Jerry Michalski: I think we all form little models of how things work. And my own personal model is that processing grief well, often relieves
Jerry Michalski: different kinds of pressures in our heads and our minds, and I'm wondering how to do that at a societal level, because
Jerry Michalski: we often
Jerry Michalski: famously, when soldiers come back from wars. Most many of them I don't know. I would love to know what the proportions are. Don't want to talk about the atrocities they saw or committed.
Jerry Michalski: And so the stories go untold, and the next generation's like, well, guess there was a war, and their idea of war is Hollywood movies where there's heroes, and there's, you know, people go Boeing, and whatever or or worse
Jerry Michalski: games where you shoot people and then respawn and then shoot people some more. And then whatever which is a big piece of our culture today, you know, 1st person shooters or other kinds of games, and those create really warped senses of what all of this is. Matthew Grady, I think, is the photographer's name Brady.
Jerry Michalski: At during the Civil War
Jerry Michalski: the cameras were still slow, so there are no action shots of the Civil War. But he went to battlefields just after battles were ended, and famously at Antietam he published. They published news photos of bloated corpses in the gullies on the battlefield of Antietam, and until then everybody thought war was kind of glorious, because the way you saw war was. There were battle painters. There was actually a subgenre painting
Jerry Michalski: of people who would go near a battle stand on the hill and then paint what they heard and saw happen, and conflate different scenes, heroic scenes and charges, and whatever all sort of be represented, or they would be more like a newspaper illustrator. But but it was very different. You didn't see the the horror. Nobody was putting it right in front of you and and
Jerry Michalski: and that shocked everybody. People were really stunned by seeing war close up, and the the sheen of war which the militaries and governments build up all the time the fancy uniforms, the glory, the parades, all those kinds of things are a way of building up more wealth for the civic, for the population, and the military sort of fell away a bunch. Kevin.
Jerry Michalski: Oh, you're muted.
Kevin Jones: Okay.
Kevin Jones: yeah. I'm back in Swan and Noah. We fled from it for a couple of months in Europe to get away from the
Kevin Jones: the trauma and sadness of the place, and I'm back
Kevin Jones: and in terms of people standing in with that, there's this sort of position that they want me to be in, and swanna grassroots, alliances
Kevin Jones: helping coordinate the nascent Chamber of Commerce in Swaninawa.
Kevin Jones: and I'm backing away from it. And David Bils from his wife was similarly, after disaster, you suddenly get a lot of influence when nobody knew you before. And so they they asked her to be on boards and things. And and she said, There's just so much sadness she's backing away, and I am, too. We're gonna
Kevin Jones: rent a place in Asheville. One of the things I discovered in Europe is that I want to walk to a cafe rather than live out in the country, and that it became a whole
Kevin Jones: really interesting thing. And so we're going to be urban, I think, and not rural. And kids are fighting over the property, which is whatever but
Kevin Jones: and I just don't want that kind of influence. And so
Kevin Jones: our community is one of those been so decimated. There's no grocery store. There's maybe a little one starting. They've taken away our post office, you know. It's it's a that the people who you would expect to stand up just are backing away. It's too heavy. And so our, our, the weakness of our community is accentuating because the folks who stepped in post disaster
Kevin Jones: just can't do it anymore. And and I'm too old to do it. And and I I am,
Kevin Jones: you know, 75. But you know somebody to whom.
Kevin Jones: when I'm in a situation, power gravitates toward me. I have something that causes that to happen, and I'm just not taking it anymore. I don't want to lift up anything I want to write.
Kevin Jones: and I don't want to have, you know, a local influence. That means I have to show up at meetings and then go to the City Hall or the county Commissioners to represent us, because, you know, we're a low status neighborhood still.
Kevin Jones: and we aren't getting our share of what you know from the county
Kevin Jones: from the State, from there is still this fema thing in some way or other, and
Kevin Jones: and so there's something that happens in a community where the folks who would stood up just can't do it. And that's where our community is kind of unraveling. And and I mean, I know of other people who are just not able to.
Kevin Jones: There are a couple of people who were still going, but many people who were
Kevin Jones: part of the relief cannot really stay for the reconstruction, because it's still so devastated, and the land was scoured, and our biodiversity was greatly compromised and compromised by the corps of engineers repair of the river which
Kevin Jones: just scraped it and scoured it. And so
Kevin Jones: So there's I'm in Swanina. But in in a couple of weeks we're gonna be back in this Airbnb that. And we're we're gonna
Kevin Jones: I don't want to be sort of the
Kevin Jones: rural squire in the community trying. I can't can't handle it. And and so many other people who were doing it
Kevin Jones: can't do it. I mean, there's there's something around the
Kevin Jones: the progressive fraying of our social fabric, and that'd be interesting to see what happens with other post-disaster places like that.
Kevin Jones: There's a great Marshall high studios you should follow on Instagram. They're wonderful. They're up in Marshall which was totally decimated. But there's a little artist collective on this island, teeny little island that has been restoring itself and getting volunteers, and and they've got enough of a
Kevin Jones: thing where they're in a really smaller community. They're building
Kevin Jones: resilience and and and repairing this great old school.
Kevin Jones: and people are getting engaged with it, and you can follow what the artists are doing. But the artists are building their community, and they're trying to imagine Marshall, you know, and they're putting in food trucks and things like that. And
Kevin Jones: there, there's not a way that I can imagine to imagine someone at all. So.
Jerry Michalski: File.
Kevin Jones: That's just sad.
Jerry Michalski: In in Oregon. There's a family called Mcmenamins
Jerry Michalski: that I might have mentioned in a couple of Ogm. Calls before, but they are. I think it's 2 brothers and a sister who, years ago started buying up derelict properties, and one of the 1st that they bought up was the poor farm that had been idled. That was 15 min east of the airport, so Portland itself is west of the airport, a little southwest and east of the airport. Just a little ways is this property called Edgefield. I have an Edgefield T-shirt from there, and they then
Jerry Michalski: converted these properties into fabulous venues, and Edgefield is thriving. It's got a hotel, 2 restaurants, 3 bars, a bowling alley, a movie theater, a Spa, a vineyard.
Jerry Michalski: a performance venue outdoors with a stage, with a major stage and a rolling lawn that goes down to the to the where, the stages and all that. And and the place is great. It's a it's a concert venue, and all that.
Jerry Michalski: I live downtown Portland walking distance. We love walkability. And so there are 5 Mcmenamins properties within walking distance of our town, and then we stayed at a Mcmenin's property in Tacoma or Seattle a couple years ago, called Anderson School, and it was an elementary school that they had taken over. They've done this a lot.
Jerry Michalski: And we heard the story that that neighborhood had basically been impoverished and was not doing well until they went in and refurbed the Anderson school. And suddenly, when you drive in now, there's a bunch of buildings and restaurants, and that the place that that corner of
Jerry Michalski: the whole Seattle Tacoma area is thriving is doing fine, and I say all of this because I wish there were more Mcmenan equivalents in communities all around the world that they've got a thriving business
Jerry Michalski: restoring places, Masonic halls, libraries. They just find stuff and then work their magic on it, and they have a lovely aesthetic. The menu is roughly the same in all their properties. They make their own beer, wine, distilled spirits, a whole bunch of stuff, anyway. It's kind of a minor miracle.
Jerry Michalski: And I'm happy to talk about something positive, because it's just sad to hear stories of how
Jerry Michalski: exhausted people get when they're trying to recover from something. So, Major.
Jerry Michalski: and I feel I, Kevin, to feel for you. It's your community which you love was just ripped.
Kevin Jones: Yeah. And and you know
Kevin Jones: David's wife and and I, our story ripples with each other and and enables other people to walk away from holding the community together.
Kevin Jones: and it's just a
Kevin Jones: you know. The devastation is so severe, and we'll be there for years. You will drive by it every day on the way to where you go, and it's just being immersed in in destruction is just
Kevin Jones: just can't deal with it, you know.
Kevin Jones: you know our our farm is.
Kevin Jones: and grass is growing, you know, there, and the river cane is growing, but it's you know it'll never be where we that's where we were gonna grow old. And now we've got to find a way to sell it because our kids don't want to agree. Then my kids can't agree on the future next to each other. So
Kevin Jones: you know, it's you know, it worked for 15 years, and you know then it didn't. I mean, I have less to complain about than other folks, but it's just
Kevin Jones: place is too damn sad to hang on.
Jerry Michalski: Yeah. Thanks. Kevin, yeah. Close, please.
Klaus Mager: Yeah, we'll do. We'll do.
Klaus Mager: Does show really is the need
Klaus Mager: to have support services in place. I mean, here in Oregon we had these devastating fires around the 20 corridor, going from bend to to Salem and to Portland, and entire communities got wiped out, I mean, just burned down. There wasn't a single house still standing.
Klaus Mager: And when you drive through today all new homes, you know, it's all recovered. It's clean again. And that happened because the State mobilized, you know, a support structure that helped everybody. They got Rvs to live in for a while and got assistance to rebuild their homes in a in a safer place.
Klaus Mager: and I think, you know, like with Fema being so handicapped. And you have people in cabinet positions who are so inadequately prepared
Klaus Mager: to deal with these kinds of emergencies and and support systems that are required.
Klaus Mager: And then you go. What happened to us? You know, I mean, what what happened to our Psyche. You know that all of a sudden we we are walking away from from people in need, and and don't really don't really try. You know it's this
Klaus Mager: idea that just let them swim on their own, since swimmers
Klaus Mager: swim or sink. Kind of mentality.
Klaus Mager: But that's what what Kevin is saying, I mean, there is outside help required for people who come in from a safe space
Klaus Mager: and engage, and if that's missing
Klaus Mager: then we're in for a really bad time. Because these storm systems and and devastations are not gonna subside. Right? I mean, we're just moving into climate change. It's just really, it's just a matter. It's just
Klaus Mager: pure luck if we don't get hit by a major storm this year. Yeah.
Klaus Mager: And then what? What's going to happen? Who who is even mentally prepared to deal with this now in this administrative leadership, and not just the administration, I mean, when you think the philosophy behind it. You know the Heritage Foundation, the project 2025, I mean, all these ideas are so alien
Klaus Mager: to to a modern society, you know, in a an empathic society.
Klaus Mager: It's it's it's really. It's really confounding to to where we're going here.
Jerry Michalski: So, thanks, thanks for bringing into the conversation the thing that lurks through many of our many of our calls here, which is the pending
Jerry Michalski: worst disasters of climate change and and other things. But really, how climate change is going to keep doing this, and it's just going to do this more and more at a at a scale where human intervention seems
Jerry Michalski: puny, ineffectual, whatever else. And I think it's it's going to be demoralizing.
Jerry Michalski: It's going to be overwhelming.
Jerry Michalski: And I'm still. I'm still thinking that the the
Jerry Michalski: positive processing of grief might help a bit in this might help get us back together might help build up our ability to
Jerry Michalski: build new. I don't. I don't know. And I think I might be just being overly optimistic here. But I'm interested in the role grief has in in these kinds of things. Eric, please.
Eric Rangell: Yeah, Hi, so
Eric Rangell: the way I can relate to historical events like World War 2 is through movies. And I posted a few movie references. But
Eric Rangell: what I just realized is for my generation, Gen. X. 9, 11, 2,001, was the event that most connected my generation with devastation and grief.
Eric Rangell: and I worked in New York.
Eric Rangell: And I took the trains path trains and saw the wreckage.
Eric Rangell: And
Eric Rangell: Now, what I'm wondering is. That was almost 25 years ago, and that probably woke up a lot of us to the threats of
Eric Rangell: the what we hold dear being destroyed. But now we're seeing the more destruction.
Eric Rangell: And I think there's something very different now about what we're seeing
Eric Rangell: then like, it's almost like we could put 9 11 on the shelf.
Eric Rangell: If if that's what it feels like that, even though we felt it at the time, it's like right now. There's something more immediate and
Eric Rangell: hurting that in these recent tragedies.
Eric Rangell: And I mean.
Eric Rangell: now, there was a movie called Worth about how to compensate families of 9, 11 victims. And that's very thought provoking. But
Eric Rangell: it's still an economic perspective from a lawyer who had to do this. But
Eric Rangell: yeah, what is worth of human life these days.
Eric Rangell: And yeah, they, how do we? As humans cope with tragedies?
Eric Rangell: I mean, there's always an outpouring at the beginning of donations. And then there's all kinds of scams you gotta watch out for.
Eric Rangell: So I think a lot of people can disconnect from helping if or limit
Eric Rangell: helping. And I know that's a tendency in me to step back, and other than
Eric Rangell: but eventually, that guy may be in a meeting where somebody recommends a charity that's doing more specific work in a specific region. And then I would donate to that.
Eric Rangell: So yeah, there's a
Eric Rangell: okay. I think we can learn from some of these movies like forgiving Dr. Mangela
Eric Rangell: and the others that I recommended. The recent one was the zone of interest. Realizing that any of us could have become Nazis if we were in that environment.
Eric Rangell: That's a psychological thing in human nature.
Eric Rangell: So let's understand ourselves, our humanity and our fellow human.
Eric Rangell: the the humanity in our fellows and be there for each other.
Eric Rangell: Thank you.
Jerry Michalski: Hmm.
Jerry Michalski: thank you, Eric. Can. Can you just talk a little bit more when you said we? We seem to have put, or we put 9, 11 on the shelf.
Jerry Michalski: Can you say more? What you mean by that? And what effect it had.
Eric Rangell: Okay. I think it is a distant memory in a lot of people who weren't immediately impacted by it. And I have a feeling that it's not being taught in schools, or as much as it was in the past. So I have a feeling that the young generation is not sensing that
Eric Rangell: the immediate devastation and what it did for us as a country, the
Eric Rangell: the real hit it took. Because, yeah, so like, there's reactions to to events around the world.
Eric Rangell: But still a lot of Americans feel still feel safe
Eric Rangell: somewhat, except for these random acts of violence that we experience.
Jerry Michalski: Stochastic violence or stochastic terrorism, or whatever we call it. It's funny, though, because
Jerry Michalski: 9 11 was a highly focused, brief
Jerry Michalski: incident of violence that took 3,000. Some lives.
Jerry Michalski: in relation to that. The Fentanyl epidemic and other sorts of things have taken enormous lives, and every day claim a whole series of lives that we don't
Jerry Michalski: sort of grieve or pay attention to, or else there's like other kinds of of
Jerry Michalski: horrible events happening that that we're in some sense.
Jerry Michalski: there's enough bad stuff happening. And our, it's it's availability to us on instant basis because of the superconductivity of the Internet and the availability and everybody carrying a high definition, camera, etc, etc. We are suddenly immersed in things that ought to be causing us to grieve more and yet an over supply of all these negative stimuli, I think, inures us
Jerry Michalski: to pain and suffering, and we will, you know
Jerry Michalski: the the 1st couple ads when Sally fields was on with running children, asking people to donate to save the children. Those are probably pretty effective, and all all of that wears off over time because we wear out over time. We can't. We can't stay in.
Jerry Michalski: Well.
Jerry Michalski: I think I think we can't stay in grief for very long, or we're not processing grief. Well, we don't.
Jerry Michalski: We don't actually face it really. Well, the backlash right now. The rewriting of history we were just talking about is going to inflict trauma on a whole bunch of people who thought things were getting a little bit better because their stories were being told.
Jerry Michalski: Their ancestor stories were being told that that's all. Been shoved back in the closet now.
Jerry Michalski: And I'm really interested in processes that make things better.
Jerry Michalski: Any other thoughts on societal, large scale collective grief, its effects.
Jerry Michalski: Where we've come from all that.
Klaus Mager: I mean, it's everywhere. I've been traveled to Chile and Argentina last year.
Klaus Mager: and this this old scholar, you know, and they always invite really interesting speakers, mostly academics.
Klaus Mager: and chile still is traumatized today by pinochet. And what what happened during this time? I mean, it's amazing. Every conversation, you know where
Klaus Mager: a little bit deeper, and when you go with Rhodes Scholar, this is always a little bit more intellectual. And and, boy, I mean every single one of the docents was like, right here, you know this pinochet, what happened, and the disappearance, and in Argentina the disappearance of so many and the the grieving mothers are still circling.
Klaus Mager: I mean, it's everywhere, you know. This is just
Klaus Mager: there was a there was a time of hope, I think, in our generation now the
Klaus Mager: the hippie era, the seventies and and sixties, seventies, and so on. No more war. And and even so it was. It was more like a fantasy. But it was at least this idea, you know, that we can create a better world. But we haven't really succeeded. And when you look around the world.
Klaus Mager: it seems, seems to be deeply embedded in our nature, and to not just on an individual level. But this collective trauma that we're causing you know, and that we just can't find leadership
Klaus Mager: that is, empathic and and caring, you know, and it seems to be so deeply embedded in our in our nature that we
Klaus Mager: that we just, you know, accumulate and and want, and you know and and use violence, and and this this kind of reckless lack of of empathy, that that is this prevalent in a significant share of the population.
Jerry Michalski: I sorry. Are you done?
Klaus Mager: Yeah.
Jerry Michalski: I grew up partly in Buenos Aires, Argentina when I was 11 and 12,
Jerry Michalski: which is a while ago. And we left basically, just before the dirty war started.
Jerry Michalski: and the whole situation on this, on the ground in Argentina, was was just spiraling downward quickly. A couple months before we left 5 guys with guns held us up at home.
Jerry Michalski: ushered us to the basement, robbed, ransacked the house, stole a lot of stuff, turns out they robbed 5 houses that evening, including the next door neighbors.
Jerry Michalski: There's a whole long story about it. But then I went back to Argentina right out of grad school fresh over the fresh Mba. The 1st little project I had was in Buenos Aires, working for Russell Acoff, one of the founders of systems, thinking he needed. Somebody who understood his ideas, spoke Spanish, and had a little time available, and I had exactly a little window before I started my real 1st job.
Jerry Michalski: and I went down and and loved my time in Argentina then, and just before leaving the people gave me a copy of the book titled Nunca Mas, which means Never again. And it was basically the report of the Commission on Disappeared persons
Jerry Michalski: which have been published widely across the country, and Argentina is famous for their truth and reconciliation process, post dirty war, where people who had tortured and killed people got some degree of amnesty in exchange for telling all the truth
Jerry Michalski: like if they discovered that you had told a partial truth, and then you could still be convicted for things you didn't confess to. But if you confess to things, you would be treated very differently. And so there was a purgative moment of accepting that these things had happened. And then, later, as DNA evidence came in.
Jerry Michalski: All of a sudden they started discovering that a lot of the kids, born from women who were kidnapped and disappeared had been placed with conservative families and the DNA testing, now allowed people to discover their grandchildren
Jerry Michalski: and meet again and figure out, oh, my God! You were doing what? Which is happening right now with Ukrainian children in Russia. By the by, exactly the same, exactly the same pattern.
Jerry Michalski: And
Jerry Michalski: all of this was healing. And yeah, I'm never quite sure when the healing is done, what works? I had a conversation with a friend in South Africa a few years back, and he was like, Yeah, we talk about the South African truth and reconciliation commissions. But the situation there's practical apartheid in South Africa to this day. It's not. It hasn't worked well. It's not. It didn't solve problems here. And I'm I'm
Jerry Michalski: troubled by all these dynamics.
Jerry Michalski: Is this to set a topic.
Jerry Michalski: do we? Do we want to not dip into it, do we? How
Jerry Michalski: how do we cope? I'm very aware of and sympathetic to the overwhelm of bad news that we are living in today, and you know Ken subscribes to one or more good news services. I think if you want to post links to them in the chat, please do. There's ways of shifting your gaze, shifting your attention. There's also ways of just working in the world where what you work toward is positive change with anybody who will show up.
Jerry Michalski: which I think is a fabulous way of working.
Jerry Michalski: But but I fear that, ignoring the grief, sorry I'm going to go personal again for a sec. One of the errors my parents and grandparents made was not telling me the difficult stories of our family history.
Jerry Michalski: They never shared them. They all wanted me to be happy and have a happy life and a happy childhood, and when I was old enough to bear the weight of some of the stories a big mistake I made with my maternal grandparents in particular, who I adored and who adored me, was not to sit them down and say, okay, guys.
Jerry Michalski: I'm old enough. I can take it. Tell me everything, and turn on recorder and and record all of that, because it's gone. Now all my ancestors have passed away, and I'm doing detective work to try to figure out what those stories were. But it's not nearly the same as actually hearing it firsthand, and I have a suspicion that hearing these things firsthand would have caused me to make different decisions earlier in life.
Jerry Michalski: because I would have understood better the weight of history and actions, and my family's role, and all those kinds of things. Eric, please.
Eric Rangell: So I want to share a tradition that Jews use for coping, and it's really embedded. The grief is embedded throughout the whole life cycle that, like even in happy occasions, there's always some bittersweet memories that are acknowledged.
Eric Rangell: And we're coming up on a holiday called Tishaba, of which is this weekend, and that's a fast day when Jews remember the destructions of the temples and all the coincidental events that happened on that day since those times the tragic days.
Eric Rangell: And
Eric Rangell: So even in happy music there's never a perfect happiness. There's always a sense of Oi in everything, and I think that if
Eric Rangell: that could be a model of yeah, always acknowledging the grief while other throughout the life cycle
Eric Rangell: cause yeah, baby's born. But there's also funerals.
Eric Rangell: And it's that wholeness that this is a whole living life fully.
Eric Rangell: Now, I also think that forgiveness is a very powerful thing when it's used properly.
Eric Rangell: I mean that movie forgiving. Dr. Mengele is about a twin who was used by Nazi experiments, and her sister was totally destroyed. Her health was totally destroyed from it, but she drew strength from her experience and
Eric Rangell: went on to build a museum in Indiana, and that museum was destroyed in a fire.
Eric Rangell: but she had it rebuilt, and she's dedicated her life to teaching about the holocaust.
Eric Rangell: So
Eric Rangell: I think we need more examples of what good can come out of tragedy that needs to be elevated more in the public consciousness, and people need to know they're not alone in whatever their grief they're going through at the time, it's got to be part of the just growing up experience.
Eric Rangell: So.
Eric Rangell: But that's just where I am now. I yeah, thanks.
Jerry Michalski: Thank you.
Jerry Michalski: We people need to be heard.
Jerry Michalski: They need to feel like they've been heard, and if they don't, if they aren't.
Jerry Michalski: Then things fester. It's not good. It doesn't end up. Well.
Jerry Michalski: Where do y'all want to take this topic? If anywhere we can shift topics, we have a bunch of time left on this call. I'm noticing we're we're stiller than usual.
Jerry Michalski: and I'm not quite sure why.
Jerry Michalski: if you wanna just check in with where this topic is taking you. Stacy.
Stacey Druss: Yeah.
Stacey Druss: this is, excuse me, this is really hard for me to say, especially because I'm the only woman on this call.
Stacey Druss: But I want to share that I'm really
Stacey Druss: God. I'm moved by so much of what was said, but
Stacey Druss: particularly what's sticking with me is what Klaus mentioned about the denial piece.
Stacey Druss: I mean some. Actually. So
Stacey Druss: I've been. I wouldn't call it grieving because I'm caught in that acceptance stage.
Stacey Druss: But something that is being ignored
Stacey Druss: is, you know, and I'm trying to figure out a way to make it light. So I'm calling it manonucleosis, which is the killing disease.
Jerry Michalski: Hmm.
Stacey Druss: But
Stacey Druss: because of what was said about denial and not wanting to look at things.
Stacey Druss: I think we need to recognize that more than 80% of violent crimes are perpetrated by men.
Stacey Druss: And I think we need to look more deeply into that.
Stacey Druss: So I'm kind of upset. Because recently I've been listening to a woman who was trafficked as a child.
Stacey Druss: and it's really important to hear those stories. And yes, but what I am really wanting to turn the
Stacey Druss: telescope on, to use Doug's phrase is.
Stacey Druss: where do these young boys that wind up going into these networks of people?
Stacey Druss: Where are they coming from.
Stacey Druss: And I'm really believing that a lot of what we're seeing, whether it be in government or whatever a lot of it is blackmail based
Stacey Druss: people being put in compromising positions that may not have been willing to cross a line, but it looks as if they did, and so they can be blackmailed in that way.
Stacey Druss: I want to just go back to the culture and the idea that where it starts because
Stacey Druss: I'm not saying everybody is bad, not saying that at all. What I'm saying is, there's something in our system
Stacey Druss: that allows for structures.
Stacey Druss: I was married to somebody, and he used to joke that he fights. He would, he would joke. We would have very
Stacey Druss: rough arguments, and those of you that know me well can probably imagine that I can be quite. I can be pretty fierce.
Stacey Druss: but he would joke about it, and he would say, I fight to win
Stacey Druss: now to him, fighting to win. He killed our family.
Stacey Druss: I was not.
Stacey Druss: I did not kill our family. I escaped our family, and there's a difference.
Stacey Druss: Not once did I call him fat, bald, and ugly, which
Stacey Druss: by all accounts he probably is. I just had to say that. Sorry
Stacey Druss: I've held it in forever. No.
Jerry Michalski: To process these things.
Stacey Druss: Well, that's where the communication comes in.
Stacey Druss: I think that's where where I'm centered right now. I'm trying to figure out. What do I do with this grief that I have.
Stacey Druss: and I know there's something called 3 C's, which is, choose, connect, and communicate
Stacey Druss: for me. I know I need to be communicating more, and that is probably going to be through writing. But to go back to my original point.
Stacey Druss: if we don't look at
Stacey Druss: it could be something simple, like how many? How many men have covered for their friends when their friends have been having an affair?
Stacey Druss: How many?
Stacey Druss: One of my earliest memories was this boy. He was probably about 9, because I was probably about 5, and he was collecting frogs in a jar.
Stacey Druss: and he used to call himself the doctor. He wanted to be a doctor when he was older, and he was collecting these frogs in the jar so that he could suffocate them.
Stacey Druss: and he was hanging out with my cousins, and I remember crying and begging them to please let the frogs go, and I remember going to my grandfather. I don't remember what everybody said. Maybe one person weekly said, I just let them go.
Stacey Druss: But why didn't everyone look at that boy and say what the hell is wrong with you.
Stacey Druss: and I guess that's what I'm calling for. I'm calling for. I'm calling for men to really protect women. And the way a man really protects women is to speak out against injustice in their own circles.
Stacey Druss: you know. And I know you guys are not the ones that need to hear this message, you know. I mean, I'm sure you've seen it, though I'm sure you know what I'm talking about. But you guys are where it starts.
Stacey Druss: and then it filters out.
Stacey Druss: I was listening to 2 right wing Podcasters, Vinnie and Adam
Stacey Druss: and Vinnie to his credit, even though I you know to his credit. He's like, you know, with this Epstein thing he's saying, I don't care if our government falls apart. I don't care. Yes, lock them all up.
Stacey Druss: But the other guy, Adam, is saying, Well.
Stacey Druss: do you really want that to happen?
Stacey Druss: And that kind of mentality that is willing to overlook children being abused like this.
Stacey Druss: Let's let's look at who these abusers are, because I think the scary part is, we're going to find out
Stacey Druss: that they're all over, and they're like we're like. We may not be looking at them like abusers.
Stacey Druss: but every time you cover for somebody doing the wrong thing
Stacey Druss: every time you laugh at something, instead of saying.
Stacey Druss: What do you really believe that
Stacey Druss: you're part of that system, and me too? So when I say you know
Stacey Druss: all of us. So thank you. I know I just rambled a lot, but it just
Stacey Druss: we have to look at this power dynamic
Stacey Druss: that's built into our institutions. And oh, and that's the last point.
Stacey Druss: even like we find out, like a teacher doing something wrong.
Stacey Druss: that school is looking to protect their image. So we also need to look at the way institutions are protecting perpetrators, families protect perpetrators.
Stacey Druss: I've had women tell me about. Luckily I've never been abused. Thank God, I with all the craziness in my family. I was always loved and protected, but I've had actually. I've had one man, too.
Stacey Druss: Talk to me about how they were abused by somebody in their own family
Stacey Druss: and told to keep quiet, because it'll destroy the family.
Stacey Druss: So you know, to get to what Kevin was saying about people not wanting to be in that heaviness
Stacey Druss: I'm guilty of that.
Stacey Druss: I'm guilty. I've tried to stay away from this topic for a really long time. It's hard and it's heavy. It's easier when you do it in a group.
Stacey Druss: I'll stop now. Thank you.
Jerry Michalski: Thank you, Stacey.
Jerry Michalski: I I appreciate your directing
Jerry Michalski: our attention to the fact that men commit most of the acts of violence. I think that to be true.
Jerry Michalski: There's a there's an underlying question sort of flowing next to our conversation, which is about nature or nurture some people I have some friends who are like, you can't change human nature. This is just the way things are. And I'm more of the wow. Our our culture and our society.
Jerry Michalski: and how we socialize people affects people's beliefs and behaviors so deeply that we can turn into very different humans, really different kinds of humans. I don't think that human nature is. You know, life is nasty, brutish, and short. The other people are always the enemy. We're very tribal, so we always hate the enemy. I don't think those things are true. I think those things are cultural and social, and that's just that's only my perspective on it.
Jerry Michalski: but I think these questions and our internal answers to them dictate a lot how we respond to these situations, what we do, whether we feel any sense of agency. If it's just human nature, is your answer.
Jerry Michalski: So you don't have a lot of agency there. You resign yourself to the fact that these things are just going to happen over and over again. If you look at the historical record. That's kind of true. There's been lots of violence, much of it unnecessary over the years.
Jerry Michalski: and there's likely to be more especially the era, the era that we're marching into Gil. Please.
Jerry Michalski: Can I?
Jerry Michalski: Sorry, Stacey Stacey, go ahead.
Stacey Druss: Just real quick, because I think that if we look at the violence against nature, that's a great starting point. And I'm even thinking about the 1st time a little kid sees a bunch of ants on the ground. There are some people that are going to encourage their kid. Oh, kill them.
Stacey Druss: and there are others that are going to look at them with wonder.
Stacey Druss: And I think that if we start there and just bring the questions to the surface.
Stacey Druss: Maybe things would be different over.
Jerry Michalski: Thanks, Stacey.
Stacey Druss: You're muted, Gil.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Yup! Yup!
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: What you just said. Stacy reminded me of the amazing Susan Griffin book, the title of which I'm blanking on.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: Purple stones.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Huh!
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: Circle of stones.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: I think.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: No, it's subtitled. The roaring inside her.
Jerry Michalski: Woman and nature, the roaring inside her.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Yeah, which speaks to what Stacey was saying. You know the the. There's a lot of hatred for women in Maga Land
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: in the midst of the general cruelty that's playing out there.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: and I think Susan draws the connection of violence against nature and violence against women
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: as generative source there. So, anyhow. Just the last minute, thought the human nature conversation I find really troubling and simplistic. My view of human nature is that it's vast and diverse, and contains all possibilities. And that's certainly the argument that Graber and Wengrow make in the dawn of everything.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: You know, and we have people who will murder their neighbors without blinking an eye, and we have people who will run into a burning building to rescue strangers, and both of those are human nature, and the question is, you know, what do we cultivate, and how do we cultivate it?
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: To the, to the assertion that the majority of violence comes from men. I would add to that that it seems to come from young men.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: and one of the speculations about the substantial decline in murder rates and other crime in the United States over the last 20 years has been because of a demographic shift of reducing numbers of young men.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: So
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: make of that what you will. I don't know what we do with that, but what I really wanted to respond to was Stacy's comment about the role of all of us, and I've seen a number of posts lately that talk about our our individual agency and lack thereof of you know how many times have any of us heard a, you know, misogynistic or racist joke.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: and either laughed or suppressed a laugh, or turned away, but not confronted, or stepped into the conversation. Say, wait a minute.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: you know, especially if it's a friend.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: especially if it's a friend acting out of the habits that they've learned over years, maybe not even thoughtfully. There's opportunities for that kind of intervention all the time, everywhere of stepping and saying, Oh, you know, that's not okay. What you just said is not okay.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: And that obviously doesn't change the vast political landscape. But it's 1 of the places where we start
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: and you know where we are with what we have.
Jerry Michalski: Scott.
Jerry Michalski: Yes, you.
Scott Moehring: Yeah. Howdy?
Jerry Michalski: Howdy!
Scott Moehring: So with my universals, frameworks of framework, of frameworks. You're talking about agency. What can
Scott Moehring: the loss of agency? And one of the themes I came to. It's it's a phrase I've actually put on the
Scott Moehring: the top card in my little deck.
Scott Moehring: What can I do?
Scott Moehring: And what's interesting? What I love about this phrase is, it can be, what can I do?
Scott Moehring: It's a total surrender.
Scott Moehring: What can I do?
Scott Moehring: Can also be what can I do.
Scott Moehring: It's exactly the same phrase, and that's a call to agency and to to
Scott Moehring: taking action, to standing up to saying what you
Scott Moehring: what you should say, what you know. You should say what you could say, all of that.
Scott Moehring: And as just a reflection on that, the one of the things that kicked this off for me in 2019
Scott Moehring: was looking up the Google Ngram, which is
Scott Moehring: the history or the the frequency of word use inside of all the books that are have been scanned over the last I don't know. 100
Scott Moehring: 100 plus years goes back to 1,800,
Scott Moehring: and the word I looked up was helpless.
Scott Moehring: and the graph was kind of like this, and then hit 2,000.
Scott Moehring: And the frequency of the word helpless did a hockey stick basically at the end.
Scott Moehring: And you can. You can try it today. And the the other word to to put in counter to that was agency, and it had exactly the opposite shape
Scott Moehring: going along. Hit 2,000, and down it went.
Scott Moehring: And I think that that's it's just. It's interesting to me, because I think books follow.
Scott Moehring: It's like a dictionary. It follows the language, you know. Books follow the culture.
Scott Moehring: I think more so than then lead
Scott Moehring: and they're just kind of that. The wake in the water right? And I think that's an interesting trend. So
Scott Moehring: it's hard to tell Gil on the chart, because the you know, it's 1,800 to to current.
Scott Moehring: you know. So it's like at some point around the 2 thousands. Yes.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Might be able to adjust the time range on it. Why I'm asking is because I suspect.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: don't know if this is true, but I suspect that the plummet comes after the after the 9 11 attacks.
Scott Moehring: That's a very interesting insight. I don't know, but I would suspect that
Scott Moehring: that was one of the factors.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Yeah, I mean that that certainly shook everybody's world up suddenly and big time
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: by everybody. I assume you mean Americans, I mean, I think everybody was like, Oh, gosh! You can weaponize aircraft! Yes. Well.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: couldn't.
Jerry Michalski: It was.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Americans big time.
Jerry Michalski: It was a symbolic act against Americans with a very narrow geographic focus. I mean, it was like.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: But it changed, but it changed air travel around the world. So everybody had that there certainly in the you know, in the jihadist community. It had a profound effect as well.
Scott Moehring: It started to tip up. Actually, in 1995.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Oh, okay.
Scott Moehring: And then it it did.
Scott Moehring: But it it is an interesting thing I highly recommend just.
Jerry Michalski: If you can add the the link to that engram. Yeah, perfect. Thank you. Perfect.
Scott Moehring: Yeah. And then I'll just do just as a counterpoint. I'll do agency. And it was just something that I realized, because, as I've talked
Scott Moehring: shared some of the things that I've been thinking about over the years here. My focus has been on the individual because I feel like it's something I actually can
Scott Moehring: have some effect over.
Scott Moehring: And I think you know, if you tell 2 friends, and they tell 2 friends, and
Scott Moehring: so on. You end up with an effect that
Scott Moehring: at least you might be able to see locally or within your local group. So that's enough for me.
Jerry Michalski: Thank you, Scott. Stacey.
Stacey Druss: Yeah, thank you, Scott. I just want to add about that about 9 11, the piece of it where it served as a wake up call for so many people, because I had so many friends that
Stacey Druss: shifted their focus from what success meant.
Stacey Druss: and driving into the city and like their careers, and they just changed their lives around to be simpler. They develop their relationships with family and friends got closer. So I just don't. I want to include that piece of
Stacey Druss: a tragedy as well, and coming back from it.
Jerry Michalski: One of
Jerry Michalski: just going back to 9 11. I remember feeling like the day after 9 11. There were articles about how people on the New York subway system were looking at each other differently, about how there was a certain tenderness and vulnerability in the air
Jerry Michalski: which was sad but magical, but different
Jerry Michalski: somehow, because New Yorkers tend to be brusk. And it's like, Yeah, we we, you know, they walk past each other trying sort of to maintain their own bubble and not get involved in whatever whatever
Jerry Michalski: and I was hoping that George W. Bush's message to the nation
Jerry Michalski: was going to be. Hey, New Yorkers.
Jerry Michalski: that feeling you've been having when you see each other on the street, or sit on the subway
Jerry Michalski: can you help us all understand what it is? And can we tap into that?
Jerry Michalski: And can we take that somewhere positive to figure out, to, to go into? And through this experience of grief
Jerry Michalski: together, and I think that might have been an opening door that was positive, and instead his message was go shopping famously, famously, he said, go shopping. If the economy falters, we're all in trouble, so don't worry. Shopping malls are safe. Just go spend money like you always do, and everything will be okay. And I hated that. And, by the way, separate short story bush Senior was on duty when the Berlin wall falls.
Jerry Michalski: And there's this magical moment when the Berlin wall falls. That's very similar. It's a pivotal moment in Western human history. Everybody's sort of looking at that going. Oh, my God! This this artifact that has been dividing the world for years and years is now melted.
Jerry Michalski: We could have done something very similar at that moment, and processed sort of grief and expectations and other sorts of things together, and and we didn't.
Jerry Michalski: So I think that
Jerry Michalski: never waste a good crisis is a horrible thing to say right now. But we have wasted these moments of crisis and change in ways that have not helped civilization, and they've kind of managed to divide us more.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: What did Bush senior say at that time? You're going to say something about that.
Jerry Michalski: I don't have a quote for Bush Senior at the time. I just know that there there was a leadership moment that he just missed.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Yeah.
Jerry Michalski: And he he! You know he was busy trying to figure out. Oh.
Jerry Michalski: the power dynamics have now shifted! How do we get whatever intelligence is available. How do we rearrange our partnerships and our strategic alliances? All those kinds of things would have been probably primary, but for me there was a in these in these major
Jerry Michalski: surprising incidents, although I won't say unexpected, because 9, 11, some people were shouting at us. This is going to happen like they're not not completely unexpected, but certainly in black swanish, right? But in these moments there's there's really seeds for large scale mental shifts that were not
Jerry Michalski: taking advantage of
Jerry Michalski: bad phrase that we're not making use of. I'm not sure exactly how to say this nicely.
Jerry Michalski: and I have a feeling that more enlightened leadership would be able to shift our perspectives more rapidly toward healthier ways of seeing. And Stacy. I think one of the things that's happened about men's behavior is.
Jerry Michalski: we've lost notions of men as guardians or stewards. And now masculinity, as you can see from the Mega male kind of stereotypes and the manosphere, and all of that has gone like off the rails in some other complete direction. And there's a lot of young men who don't have role models and don't know what to do in.
Jerry Michalski: There's a system built to catch them and groom them in, I think, relatively dysfunctional notions of what it means to be a man in the world.
Jerry Michalski: And then we wonder when you know when all these other things kind of spike up later on. Stop, please.
Scott Moehring: I think this. I wasn't sure this was going to apply to this topic. I was at a funeral over the weekend. Well, yeah, over the weekend.
Scott Moehring: and that's a very individual personal thing, but it's also common across all of us.
Scott Moehring: And what was fascinating to me was all the conversations beforehand about
Scott Moehring: some of these dynamics that were behind the scene.
Scott Moehring: Oh, this person broke up with this person, and I'm not going to talk to them because they spurned them, and etc. Etc.
Scott Moehring: And being confronted with the finality of everything and seeing it, you know our own.
Scott Moehring: you know ultimately our own destiny. It kind of.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: It.
Scott Moehring: Changed them, and they all
Scott Moehring: purposely went out and found each other, and had the conversations, brief as they were at the funeral, to
Scott Moehring: smooth it over and say, You know what
Scott Moehring: life's too short. I don't want to hold a grudge against you anymore.
Scott Moehring: And it was really it was really remarkable to see
Scott Moehring: because again, on an individual level, it happened. And how do you build that into a more collective, societal thing, where we realize that
Scott Moehring: it's us. It's all us. It's always us. It's not us and them right.
Jerry Michalski: Thank you.
Jerry Michalski: Let's sit in silence for a little bit with this, and see where we go for the last little stretch of our call.
Jerry Michalski: I'll bring us back up.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: You know, you know.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: Thank you. Well, I've been here
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: absolutely.
Jerry Michalski: Thank you, and quoting, Oh, sorry, Stacey, go ahead.
Stacey Druss: Just real quick. I just want to encourage the use of the word grooming that you just used when speaking about young Maga boys. I think we should speak about them in terms of being groomed
Stacey Druss: for a couple of reasons. I just think that's a perfect word.
Jerry Michalski: If you look at the system, that's kind of been set up and how well, it has worked
Jerry Michalski: it fits the word fits reasonably well.
Stacey Druss: Well, the other nice piece of it, because you mentioned forgiveness is that it can help to see
Stacey Druss: the victimization of them as well, and could aid in the forgiveness piece.
Jerry Michalski: Nicely put. Thank you.
Jerry Michalski: Hank. I was just gonna check in with you and ask you where your heart is on this.
Hank Kune: Well, I I missed
Hank Kune: last week's call, which was more about personal grief.
Hank Kune: So I I'm thinking now there's a very strong connection in me between personal grief and societal grief.
Hank Kune: In the period between trump getting elected
Hank Kune: and the 1st month or 2 of his.
Hank Kune: of his reign as empire of idiocy in America.
Hank Kune: I felt that my own youth and my own innocence
Hank Kune: was being ripped away from me. My feeling that I have had a
Hank Kune: for give and take most of my 77 years.
Hank Kune: that people are generally good, and governments too, and
Hank Kune: if left to their own devices, they'll tend to do the right thing.
Hank Kune: and I know intellectually that history shows many examples of when that isn't true.
Hank Kune: But I also know that history does show examples of when it, when it is true.
Hank Kune: So moving my own loss and my grieving
Hank Kune: through the 5 stages of the Kubler-ross model.
Hank Kune: it took me about 4 months to reach acceptance and thinking about what acceptance might mean.
Hank Kune: For me and for people like us
Hank Kune: who probably can't change the cycle that we're in
Hank Kune: these things happen in cycles, and we seem to be in a cycle moving towards towards
Hank Kune: add things in society. But maybe we can.
Hank Kune: by accepting that it's going to happen, perhaps shift
Hank Kune: some of the consequences, because the consequences haven't happened yet.
Hank Kune: They happen day by day the futures
Hank Kune: appear and unfold day by day.
Hank Kune: So I was wondering during the 1st parts of this call
Hank Kune: are those 5 stages of of Kubleros?
Hank Kune: Are they true for societies as well?
Hank Kune: And if they're true for societies as well.
Hank Kune: what happens in societies after acceptance?
Hank Kune: What those acceptance of bad things.
Hank Kune: of walking away from people in need of help from looking away at what's happening with climate and
Hank Kune: and all the evils done to women and
Hank Kune: black lives which don't end up to matter for most white people, and
Hank Kune: that forms a kind of inner climate of society.
Hank Kune: But can that inner climate of society be shaped or shifted by people
Hank Kune: like us, by a small group of people who feel that it's important
Hank Kune: to accept what's happening. But change, what's going to happen?
Hank Kune: Don't know if I've really made myself clear on that. And I I put this into the chat as well. And it's a question I have. I don't have an answer. But what did the Japanese do after Hiroshima and Nagasaki
Hank Kune: far bigger shock than 9 11.
Hank Kune: So that's where I'm at at the moment.
Jerry Michalski: Thank you, Hank, thank you very much.
Jerry Michalski: I have a tiny bit of perspective on how Japan responded to this, which is and which ought to be fact checked.
Jerry Michalski: Japan apparently does not teach Japan's role in World War 2 to students
Jerry Michalski: Japan does not have Stoicbach Steina, or museums dedicated, I mean, there's the Hiroshima monument of Hey, look! We were devastated by a bomb, but
Jerry Michalski: but they don't. They did not engage in war guilt. Other other kinds of things. The responses of Japan and Germany, I think, are maybe this is the wrong way to set it this way almost diametrically opposite
Jerry Michalski: to their role in World War 2. And what to do about it?
Jerry Michalski: Both countries were demilitarized as much as possible. And right now.
Jerry Michalski: because of China's possible violence against Taiwan because of a bunch of different things, and certainly because of the war in Ukraine. Right now, we're seeing the remilitarization of both countries. In particular, Germany is jumping right in because somebody's got to lead and help Ukraine, etc. Etc. And and also the belief that you know, after Ukraine or Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, etc. Etc.
Jerry Michalski: Th, this could go for quite a while if if it's allowed to keep going anyway. So
Jerry Michalski: again, I come back to? What are the best ways? What are the most useful ways to process
Jerry Michalski: hugely difficult experiences at a collective level?
Jerry Michalski: What do you ask people to do? What do you make people do?
Jerry Michalski: How do you frame? How do you frame those moments?
Jerry Michalski: And if, if after this call, if any of you bump into essays thoughts whatever. Put them on the list share them back in because we've got
Jerry Michalski: This might show up later. Stacey.
Stacey Druss: You're you're reminding me of restorative justice where the criminal needs to listen
Stacey Druss: to what? To the words of the people that they've heard
Stacey Druss: Klaus mentioned how the Allies forced
Stacey Druss: those visions to be on TV.
Stacey Druss: You know, people don't want to look
Stacey Druss: the bad stuff, the ugly stuff or their own behavior.
Stacey Druss: So I think there's something in it to have to listen to these stories.
Stacey Druss: Maybe in the safety of a group where nobody's being singled out. But that's so important. And that's why it's just so egregious
Stacey Druss: at what schools are. You know what they're trying to do to schools and take away all these stories
Stacey Druss: over.
Jerry Michalski: Thanks, Stacey. Restorative justice and truth and reconciliation are in my brain under many different categories, but they're under design from trust, which is the thing I've been chewing on for a couple of decades now, and the idea that
Jerry Michalski: truth and reconciliation is you tell us the truth. You confess to the thing that you did, and we have a different sense of justice and balance, and and in exchange for the truth as best we can figure it out
Jerry Michalski: that's valuable to society, and will help us heal, etc, etc. And I think, like truth and reconciliation in Argentina. I think, work pretty well. I think that's you know Gil is asking in the chat. Where do we think there have been successes? I think there are successes. I think there's some places where post-conflict good things happened. There are some places I would love to know more about, like Moorish Spain.
Jerry Michalski: You know the the Caliphate in Spain that came in from Africa and basically took over Africa for a couple 100 years, and then got kicked out by the Catholics and the Berbers from the South
Jerry Michalski: there was tremendous
Jerry Michalski: cooperation and academic work and poetry in, you know more Spain, and there's a there's a large Spanish city called Matamoros.
Jerry Michalski: and if you decompose it. It means kill the Moors. The name of the city is Kill Moors.
Jerry Michalski: Moors being those Arabs
Jerry Michalski: 1,500 years. Gosh! I forgot it was that it was that long sorry about that. Thanks, Ken.
Jerry Michalski: But for me, I would love to know more about what worked really well in more Spain. I'm very interested in historic periods where there was convivencia. This whole idea of hey? We don't care. I just read, and I'll post a guest essay. A friend has a
Jerry Michalski: a substack called jigsaw puzzle, global jigsaw. It's called, and she's really smart, and she has a couple of people write guest posts, and one was just posted about India, and it was a real cultural sort of peek into how India has so many languages, so many cultures, and yet seems to sort of muddle through and get along.
Jerry Michalski: Not that there hasn't been violence, that there's been like large scale violence, but it was a really nice look into collaboration, and also there was another post about the Jewish silk road. Let me find those and post them to the chat before I forget them. But go ahead, Gil.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Yeah.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: designed from trust, Jerry. Thanks for raising that. It's also designed for the possibility of trust, isn't it?
Jerry Michalski: Yes, that's in fact, what it? Yeah, that's what it's that's what it's meant. That's what it's meant to do. It's not foisting trust forcing people to trust. It's like, hey? If you did this you might trust each other more.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: And the example that's in my mind lately we may have mentioned, this last week is around medical malpractice hospital systems that have given agency to their doctors rather than their attorneys
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: have found that when the doctors apologize
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: for bad stuff that happens, sometimes apologize to the families, medical malpractice suits plummet.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: People recognize that. You know this is imperfect. Mistakes happen, they appreciate the consideration, and they grieve, they grieve and they forgive, and they don't sue.
Jerry Michalski: Hmm.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: When there's a direct communication and apology rather than lawyers, saying, Oh, no, you can't save that.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: And we all have little lawyers insides our heads, don't we?
Jerry Michalski: Apparently they were installed early.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Yeah.
Scott Moehring: You do? Do you think that that relates to
Scott Moehring: troll behavior online, where people are able to? There say things online that they wouldn't say to people's faces.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Sure.
Scott Moehring: And then in the same way, yeah, so-, so that if you get the 2.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Distant and anonymous.
Scott Moehring: So if you get the 2 people together
Scott Moehring: apologizing or or saying what they need to say, instead of intermediaries who have their own agendas.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Yeah.
Scott Moehring: Interesting. Okay.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Yeah, or actually listening to each other and inquiring about what each other cares about. And maybe it needs to be helped and facilitated by people who are skillful at that, because we don't all know how to do that. But you know, in my few experiences of reaching across the gulf
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: around that sort of thing. I find remarkable openings.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: and I find also I don't not a lot on the Internet, because I curate my followers pretty tightly, but I had somebody yesterday who I've had some reasonable conversations with
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: and something came up around around Israel and Gaza, and instead of having a discussion about where we disagree or have different interpretations. He just started yelling at me like, you're complicit.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: I thought interesting, like, you know you, you've seen like 5% of my posts. You've never talked with me.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: You don't know the conversation that I have in my life with real people.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: but it's easy for you to like, you know. Throw, throw an aspersion at me.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: and I haven't responded. I'm kind of wondering how to respond in a ways productive, and I think I'm going to ask, you know, like.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: what's what's your objective in your communication with me? Are you trying to change my mind?
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Are you trying to? You're certainly not trying to design from trust. But like, what are you looking for here? Because just calling names doesn't advance anything that you, this other person actually care about.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: So like, what's up.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: But yeah, I think I think the there's the anonymity of it. There's some interesting stuff I've seen in the last few days. I'll see if I can find the links to it. Talking about the breakdown in human communication in the age of the Internet.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: I've seen it very directly in, and
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: I think particularly younger people, but I'm told it's more broad of people who are not curious. They don't know how to ask questions or have conversations.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: There's a a i gotta find this. Maybe this in the Times the last few days about
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: People younger than us, having less and less social life, because so much of their life is mediated through the electrons.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: And so, being with people in relationships of depth, seems to, according to some people seems to be weakening. Don't know.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: It's certainly, I think not what we expected when when
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: these things suddenly appeared in our lives.
Jerry Michalski: That's right, and I still don't have my flying car.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: No coming.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: Or my jetpack.
Jerry Michalski: Yeah. Yeah.
Jerry Michalski: Although when you see people on jet packs, you're like, I'm not so sure I'd be up for doing that.
Jerry Michalski: When John Robinson was doing it, though
Jerry Michalski: both trips end fast and sharp.
Jerry Michalski: Any concluding thoughts. We're near at the end of our time. Any, I take it, we might be
Jerry Michalski: tuckered out on this topic. I think that we've raised a couple of interesting questions that might make future topics. But any any concluding thoughts.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: It's it's
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: it's a tough and deep topic, Jerry. It's like, you know, it's not something we can resolve quickly. It opens, it opens things, and then ripples go deep, and we might want to revisit it.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: you know, in 2 or 3 or 6 months, or something, or whenever it comes up.
Jerry Michalski: Cool. I thought I heard Ken's voice.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: Thank you.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: I've been
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: trying to find something that crystallized that I could say. It's been difficult, because it's been a very fast conversation. Actually
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: I would have liked more stillness.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: I'll just tell a story that Jack Cornfield used to tell about at the end of the Vietnam war. This very famous
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: Buddhist monk who was going to do a healing ceremony, and there were tens of thousands of people who'd been displaced and lost family members, and who were wounded and maimed, and they were all gathered. And they're like, What's this guy going to do?
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: And he came out and he began to chant.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: It's an old Buddhist chant says hatred never ceases from hatred, but by love alone is healed. This is an ancient and eternal law, and he just kept chanting that over and over and over, and pretty soon everybody in the place was weeping because they realized they had so much hate.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: they had so much anger. They had so much rage at what had occurred, and in listening to this, to realize that that's not going to do anything except make it worse.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: It reminds me of James Baldwin's quote that you know the reason most people hang on to their hatred, so so closely is they realize once they once they let go of them, they'll have to deal with their pain.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: And I think people in general in our culture weird cultures are very pain, averse. They don't want to look at their pain. They don't want to look at what's underneath. They just want to distract themselves, you know. Give me
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: give me a movie. Give me? Give me drugs. Give me alcohol, whatever it is. You know I just don't want to go there, and I know that's been true for me personally in many areas of my life where you know, I wouldn't look at the pain until it caught up and grabbed me by the throat and said, You need to look at this
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: particularly. We talked about young men. You know. Young men are not trained in how to handle this. I never got any lessons on how to handle the grief of losing my mother, who, I didn't know, was sick, or, you know it took me 25 years
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: to practice to to deal with that.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: You know, and
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: I'm lucky I found a way, you know. I got help, but help is not generally available for that. That's Gil asked earlier. You know, what are we cultivating
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: as a culture?
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: We tend to cultivate things that do not increased separateness.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: the increased disconnection that increase, atomization, increase dehumanization.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: And years ago I read somebody quoting that said that, strictly speaking, there are no warlike people, but there are warlike leaders
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: and warlike leaders as we're seeing right now. Cultivate hatred, they cultivate separation, they cultivate demonization.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: And we know where that goes. We saw that 80 years ago we saw that
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: ordinary people will press buttons that will drop atomic bombs, and they'll put people in ovens under the right circumstances. Everyone is subject to that, me included. I'm not exempt from that. None of us on this call are.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: and recognizing that, and being willing to look at
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: having the abyss in your soul stare back at you with all of the darkness, with all of the ancient hatreds that have belonged to humanity. For as long as humanity has been on the planet, and know that under the right circumstances it can take you over, and therefore you need to be very vigilant and very willing to look at yourself
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: and say, if that comes along, I would sooner die than act on those impulses.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: That's a maturation process that we could cultivate the fact that
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: quote, modern peoples no longer initiate their children into the wonders of being alive.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: You know there is no connection
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: for most people to the earth.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: We talk about nature as if it was something separate from us. Rather, you know, Vanessa Andreati says that humans are an extension of Gaia's body, not the other way around. That's an incredibly different stance to hold.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: and when you have that, then you start to weep and and mourn for what has been lost of Gaia's body of the cloak of life that's being unraveled.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: And when it comes to warriorship
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: which is not about fighting a war, but rather about how you are in the world filled with
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: different battles.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: The saying that I really like is in conflict. You don't bring a knife that cuts you. Bring a needle that sews. So what do we do? How do we bring that needle in and sew up what is unraveling, and reweave what is unraveling
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: and grief has a really big part in that, because it's
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: I mentioned last week about the tiers.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: Certain kinds of tears prevent you from being ripped apart when large, painful things are moving through you.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: We've got really big, large, painful things as societies to to atone for, to amend, make amends for.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: and it's not going to happen from individuals going through it alone. It's going to happen, from people coming together and saying, we got to face this
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: and that which we don't learn through through comedy. We learn through tragedy.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: you know, looking at all the disasters occurring sooner or later. People are going to recognize, you know what
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: there's no them. There's only us, and we need each other. If we're going to get through this.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: and that'll be a different kind of grief, and that'll be the kind of grief that takes us out the other side into some kind of joy.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: But there'll be tremendous grieving for what's been lost along the way, and that will never be replaced.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: So those are some of my thoughts on
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: societal or social, or larger scales of grief than just dealing with your own individual pain.
Jerry Michalski: But if you can, ken, did you want to jump in for a moment before we wrap up.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: Hey!
Hank Kune: Yeah, but it's hard to say anything after.
Jerry Michalski: Yeah.
Hank Kune: Beautiful words of Ken
Hank Kune: I. You had asked the question, would we want to come back to this topic after a couple of months, and I was going to say, especially if people
Hank Kune: can bring examples of how individuals, communities, and countries are able to
Hank Kune: deal with their grief and change their inner climate.
Jerry Michalski: Agreed. I like that. Thank you, Stacey.
Stacey Druss: Yeah. I just wanna say real quickly that on my call on Monday, this coming up
Stacey Druss: at one o'clock Eastern time. I'd like to pick up from what Ken was saying, and maybe maybe bring that needle and focus on the young
Stacey Druss: type, boys or whatever. So I hope that some of you will be able to come because I'd really like to have your input. But I want to continue this conversation.
Jerry Michalski: Cool ken. Hast thou a poem.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: It's not a poem, but I thought I would read a few excerpts.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: not the whole thing, because it's very long. A few excerpts from Chief Seattle's speech. Is everybody familiar with Chief Seattle's speech? Anybody
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: not heard of this before?
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: There are a couple different versions, but
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: just a few things I copied out. I do not know. Our ways are different from your ways. The sight of your cities pains the eyes of the red man, but perhaps it is because the red man is a savage and does not understand.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: There is no quiet place in the white man cities, no place to hear the unfurling of the leaves in spring, or the rustle of the insect's wings. But perhaps it is because I am a savage, and I do not understand.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: The clatter only seems to insult the ears.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: And what is there to life if a man cannot hear the only cry of the whippoorwill, or the arguments of the frogs around a pond at night
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: am a red man, and I do not understand.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: The Indian prefers the soft sound of the wind darting over the face of a pond, and the smell of the wind itself cleansed by a midday rain or scented with pinion pine. The air is precious to the red man, for all things share the same breath.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: The beast, the tree, the man. They all share the same breath.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: The white man does not seem to notice the air he breathes like a man dying for many days. He is numb to the stench.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: but if we sell our land, you must remember that the air is precious to us that the air shears its spirit with all the life it supports.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: The wind that gave our grandfather his 1st breath, also receives his last sigh.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: and the wind must also give our children the spirit of life, and if we sell our land you must keep it apart and sacred as a place where even the white man can go to taste the wind that is sweetened by the meadow's flowers.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: To us the ashes our ancestors are sacred, and their resting place is hollowed ground.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: You wander far from the graves of your ancestors, and seemingly without regret.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: Your religion was written upon tablets of stone by the iron finger of your God, so you could not forget.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: The red man could never comprehend or remember it. Our religion is the traditions of our ancestors, the dreams of our elders, given to them in solemn hours of the night by the Great Spirit
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: and the visions of our sachems, and it is written in the hearts of our people.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: your dead cease to love you and the land as soon as their nativity and the land of their nativity, as soon as they pass the portals of the tomb and wander away beyond the stars. They are soon forgotten and never return
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: are dead. Never forget this beautiful world that gave them being.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: They still love its verdant valleys, its murmuring rivers, its magnificent mountains, sequestered vales, and verdant lined lakes and bays, and ever yearn in tender, fond affection over the lonely hearted living, and often return from the happy hunting ground to visit, guide, console, and comfort them.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: We will ponder your proposition, and when we decide we will let you know. But should we accept it, I here and now make this condition, that we will not be denied the privilege without molestation, of visiting at any time the tombs of our ancestors, friends, and children. Every part of this soil is sacred in the estimation of my people. Every hillside, every valley.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: every plain, every grove, has been hallowed by some sad or happy event, in days long vanished. Even the rocks, which seem dumb and dead as the swelter in the sun along the science shore thrill with memories of stirring events connected to the lives of my people, and the very dust upon which you now stand responds more lovingly to their footsteps than to yours, because it is rich with the blood of our ancestors, and our bare feet are conscious of the sympathetic touch.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: What is a man without the beasts? If all the beasts are gone, men would die from a great loneliness of spirit.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: Whatever happens to the beast soon happens to man, all things are connected.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: Let him be just, and deal kindly with my people, for the dead are not powerless. Dead. Did I say there is no death, there is only a change of worlds.
Jerry Michalski: Thank you.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: Thank you all.
Jerry Michalski: Or showing up the way you have.
Jerry Michalski: This is beautiful and intense.
Jerry Michalski: Off we go into another, into another weekend almost, and August, and the rest of our lives.
Jerry Michalski: Thank you.
Ken Homer • SF Bay Area: So.